[music]
>> Bloomberg audio studios podcast radio
news
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the odd lots podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal. And I'm Tracy Alloway. Tracy
recording this April 17th big drop in
the price of oil today
on the headlines the growing optimism
that I think I'm you know ceasefire will
endure anything could happen but at
least for now it appears the extreme
left tail scenario like $200 oil maybe
off the table. Right so I'm looking at a
chart of WTI at the moment which might
be a little hint as to our guest that
we're about to introduce but it's
currently at around $83 a barrel down
>> was that you didn't say Brent. Right.
Yeah good hint. Yeah good
hint. It's a good hint. Yeah yeah it's a
good hint. Everyone can see already see
the headline on this episode if they
clicked into it but anyway it was at
$112 per barrel in March or actually in
early April God time flies when you're
talking energy crisis and war in the
gulf. You know even setting aside the
war however there's a lot that I've been
very curious about the future of the US
oil industry. You know we were in Alaska
last summer and I think one of my
favorite parts of that trip was talking
to that company that made the steel
tubing for oil companies up on the Not
the north shore the north the north
slope. Oh yes. For the companies up
there The north slope. The north shore
of Alaska
like it's Long Island you know the way
steel prices were going to affect the
break even cost of American oil
producers etc and the interaction of
tariffs and higher services costs etc
and we know that the US produces a lot
of um oil and it's an exporter but
prices went up and Chris Wright he went
down to zero week a few weeks ago he's
like please produce more but as you've
been writing about the rig counts have
been going the other direction. Yeah
that's right so I mean this was also of
the Iran story this idea that well if we
get a huge hike in the price if oil is
going to be above $100 per barrel then
maybe we'll see some sort of supply
response in the US right but if you look
at the Baker Hughes oil and gas rig
count it's basically been trending
sideways in fact the last available data
it fell by three and then if you go out
even further you know it's kind of been
going sideways and slightly down since
basically 2023 so
you know we haven't seen a big supply
side push and that's despite a lot of
noise coming out from the administration
about unleashing US energy and you know
letting everyone including your grandma
drill. You know getting it right is it's
tricky for all administrations right
every in theory it's like oh yeah let's
produce more there was a lot of
production actually under Biden but the
administration didn't want to brag about
it it's kind of weird then you have an
administration that does want to brag
about it but they're like oh and now
there's a bunch of Venezuelan oil on the
market unsanctioned so what does that
mean anyway here's the other thing
I'm really into the show Landman and I
really just want to talk
>> this is just an excuse for you to talk
about Landman.
>> and so I like I got to talk to someone
who's just out there independent small
oil and gas company because I have a
million questions about how realistic
that is I like it every time we get to
talk about Christmas trees of like
valves and spools and casings and There
you go well we really do
>> an episode for both of us. You really
have written a lot about the technology
of oil production for a long time. One
article and then I think I revisited it
but it had one of my favorite headlines
of all time and one of my favorite ever
leads but the headline was how actual
nuts and bolts are bringing down oil
prices and it was about standardization
of oil drilling parts. Well we really do
have the perfect guest someone who is
who's in the game actual got skin in the
game in the space. We're going to be
speaking with Jack McClendon CEO of the
small oil and gas company called Sienna
natural resources. Jack I've wanted to
have you on the podcast long time so
thrilled you're here what do you tell us
what Sienna natural resource what's your
business? Yeah sure thanks for having me
on. Yeah we're just a small independent
oil and gas producer so we operate in
the the part of the segment called the
upstream oil and gas industry so that is
the actual direct companies that extract
the hydrocarbons from the ground and so
yeah our business is a little bit
different from a lot of the publicly
traded companies that you see you know
the the Exxons and the Diamondbacks of
the world who are drilling kind of
horizontal shale wells there are many
more companies that are much more
similar to mine you know that the
horizontal shale game has largely become
the domain of a very large companies I
mean you've got to have scale to be able
to operate in that space. We're largely
production company so the way to kind of
think about it is you know we buy assets
that we think are undercapitalized under
appreciated try to squeeze a little bit
more juice out of each producing well
and try to get cost down. Although there
are smaller companies that that do do
drilling and we have drilled in the past
and we will likely drill in the future
as well too. Would you say you're
essentially going around and buying odd
lots of
oil and gas assets that other companies
may not be getting the best out of?
Yeah you could you could say that I mean
a lot of just as I said a lot of the
assets that we're targeting are just
they're just too small you know they're
rounding errors you know on the balance
sheets of these large shale companies
who you know are buying tens of
thousands or hundreds of thousands of
acres and drilling you know two to three
miles under the ground so it's it's just
we produce the same product it's just a
very different business. And I'm reading
here it says you started this business
in 2018 which I find really fascinating
because 2014 2015 the shale bust was an
incredibly painful moment in time not
just if you were in the energy
specifically but also if you were in
other parts of the market like the debt
market at that time. And there was crazy
stuff going on at that time like people
talking about oil going down to like
zero I remember being in a restaurant
and well it eventually
it didn't go to zero
but that was different but I remember
being in a restaurant and I was talking
to my husband about oil prices at that
time and some random guy like overheard
us at the next table and got up and said
like oil is going down to I think it was
either 20 bucks a barrel or zero and
then just like left the restaurant.
That's very that's a
weird anecdote. So it was like a very
strange time in the oil market and yet
you decided to start a shale company at
that time what was the thinking? I'm
going to I'm going to correct you
quickly and then and then go back into
context so it's it's not a shale
business so
>> Okay sure. We operate largely
conventional reservoirs and so you know
the way to kind of think about it is
shale is what is called unconventional
so conventional reservoirs have much
higher porosity and permeability they
are actually much better reservoirs from
a geologic standpoint and so for the
most part you'll hear it in the industry
parlance those were the easy the easy
reservoirs to find right if you go back
to like the 1920s 1930s you know
drilling a field like the Yates field
which is kind of one of the most
prolific oil fields you know you were
basically drilling a thousand feet into
the ground vertically and they were
getting you know 400 to 500 to 1500
barrel a day IPs you know so it's just
the conventional reservoirs are the
better reservoirs they've largely been
exploited so when you say shale company
that's the unconventional reservoirs and
so that was the rock that largely was
thought it was impossible to produce
Right. and really until the advent of
horizontal development well not
horizontal development so much as
hydraulic fracturing it was because the
the pore space was just too small and so
there was no way to commercially extract
oil and gas from those reservoirs we
knew the oil and gas was there we just
couldn't get it out so that's just a
little point of distinction there that's
the difference kind of between a
conventional and an unconventional
reservoir so most of what we operate is
conventional reservoirs so these are
this is these are reservoirs that were
found you know anywhere from 70 to 100
years ago and have largely been
exploited but still have plenty of oil
and gas kind of left to offer and so
just a little bit of my background
so I I kind of grew up in the shale
space you know my father obviously
played a pretty instrumental role in
bringing shale gas and shale oil kind of
to mainstream America you know I'll
remind you back in 2005 and it's kind of
hard to believe now that there was a lot
of fears that America was actually
running out of oil and gas production I
mean I think it was as as early you go
as 2004 2005 the country was only
producing about 5 million barrels a day
and you know importing anywhere between
19 to 20 million barrels a day and so
there was real concern and you know
really really some fears of you know
what happens if
you know oil runs out and lo and behold
we have the shale revolution and one of
my favorite
quotes is never underestimate the
ingenuity of the American oil man and
>> [laughter]
>> I just think it's a a testament to the
tenacity and grit and intelligence of
our industry largely maligned by a
pretty big segments of the company that
do not realize how much this has
transformed our country you know we've
gone from producing you know anywhere
from 5 million barrels a day now we are
now we're the largest oil and gas
producer in the world we produce more
oil than any company in the any country
in the world and so you know it's just
it's kind of gone unnoticed and so I
want I you know I wanted to kind of get
out and
bring that up. Sorry I'm so used to
saying shale as a byword for US oil
production like I I get the distinction
between the horizontal drilling and what
you guys are doing. And that's fair and
and the majority of of oil production in
America right now is from shale you know
the largest conventional fields are
largely in Alaska you guys just
mentioned the north slope most of
Alaska's conventional but you know that
the Permian Basin and and a lot of the
other big shale basins I mean that's
where the majority of the oil comes from
these days. I mean, you know, out of
that 13 million barrels a day, you know,
at least five come from the Permian and
that's mostly from shale. So, it's I
think it's fine to kind of conflate the
two, to be honest. That's where most of
the capital goes and that's where most
of the oil comes from. You mentioned
growing up in the business and your
dad's role in making America the energy
behemoth that is today, your dad being
Aubrey McClendon. One of the things I
know about him was that he is a famed
map a huge map collector and I kind of
feel like all oil and gas people are get
really into maps and I'm
You tilt your camera and I was like that
is that map to your your right shoulder?
It looks like Texas a map of Texas. Is
that one of your dad's part of your
dad's map collections? No, it's not part
of his collection, but I did inherit a
lot of his loves and one of them is that
is I also love maps. That's an old map
of Texas and Oklahoma, which was Indian
territory back in the 1800s. I think I
think that map was I think this map was
made in like 1870. So, I do really
appreciate vintage maps and so yeah,
you'll you'll see that in the back and
and that that may be particular to the
oil and gas industry as well too,
because any good oil man, if you walk
into a conference room, they're going to
have maps up cuz you kind of got to know
as you said, there's probably a lot of
that in in land man.
Well, I noticed you don't have a poster
of Billy Bob Thornton in your office.
However, I asked this question on behalf
of Joe. How accurate is Land Man in your
experience? I mean, there are certain
aspects obviously that that famous
windmill speech that he makes is is how
a lot of people a lot of people in our
industry feel and I I believe it's the
truth.
A lot of it is obviously there's plenty
of exaggerations. I don't know too many
land men who have had a gun held to
their head from from a member of the
cartel. There's a lot of truth in the
industry as well.
>> going into business with the financial
backer of the cartel is a little weird.
Anyway. Yeah, exactly.
>> spoilers. Please. Yeah, yeah, yeah,
sorry. I'm an imperfect narrator for
that as well too, because I I will admit
that I I have not watched the show maybe
as religiously as other people that have
watched it. Actually, there's another
element of Land Man that I this is going
to be a little bit far afield from oil
business clay shows, but this is
something I've heard and feel free to
answer this as with any level of tact or
delicacy. I have heard that a lot of um
the wives of the oil industry don't like
it as much as the men do because of the
high degree of sexualization of both
Billy Bob Thornton's wife and daughter
in the show and that they the men think
oh it's a great show. It shows our
industry and that actually there's some
gender
families in the patch in the space in
the industry, there's some gender divide
on the show. Does that resonate? You
know, as as as I said, I my
My wife watched two episodes with me and
she said this is ridiculous. Okay, well
then [laughter] I'm okay. Okay, well
there you go. So, so maybe maybe that's
maybe I'll just leave it at that.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Okay, let's talk a little bit of
economics. Even before the recent war in
Iran, we wanted to talk because I'm very
interested in just like what's happening
to your costs and break evens,
particularly in the wake of tariffs, in
the wake of ongoing services inflation,
in the wake of a big dash for
commodities because every there's so
much building data centers, etc. Talk to
us a little bit about the evolution of
your costs as a business in the last
several years, but also maybe in the
last year. Yeah, no, sure. I'm happy to
do that and you know, I won't tell you
anything that you guys maybe haven't
already heard, but
costs in general, you know, our our
costs are kind of allocated into two
buckets, right? You have your operating
expenses, which are kind of fixed and
variable costs. Those are the the
day-to-day costs to run a business,
whether that's paying your people who
are actually out in the field, you know,
the cost of chemicals to treat your
wells, the prices you pay for
electricity to power your wells. And
then you have your capital costs, which
are, you know, largely tangible and
intangible goods, right? So, the you
know, the day rate of cost to drill, the
amount you pay to drill a well, the
amount you actually pay for the the
physical tools and equipment that
actually go into a well, you know,
that's steel and metal and other human
labor. But what I will tell you is is
since COVID and and this is as I said,
not unique to us is you know, costs
costs have gone up. You know, personnel
costs are up and you know, and you know,
back in the day in COVID, you know,
salaries went up across the board and
and you know as well as I do, once you
raise salaries, it's very hard to get
those back down. Chemical costs have
gone up. Utility costs have gone up. You
know, so costs in general are up, I
would say about 25 to 30% for my
business really over the last five years
and as I said, a lot of that is power, a
lot of that is chemicals. The biggest
chunk of that is is people. You know,
people costs have gone gone up across
the industry. Capital costs, tariffs
obviously have had a material impact on
the price of steel and the price of
aluminum. Those have largely gone up.
What I will tell you though is recently
and this is kind of a couple of a couple
of months,
there has been some slack in those
markets and a big part of that is kind
of due to what you due to what you
identified with the Baker Hughes rig
count. You know, with prices kind of
hovering in the 50s and 60s, with those
rising costs, the industry is just not
as profitable as it once was at 50 or
60. And so, you know, there was really
starting to be some slack in the rig
market, some slack in the the frac fleet
market and you know, quite frankly, all
of that leads to a little bit of pricing
deflation. And so, generally speaking, I
would say costs are up across the board
20 to 30% even though recently,
especially on the capital side, you've
seen a little bit of a decrease and that
is largely due to the fact that the
price has been depressed and the
industry was just not as profitable as
it once was. And the other thing I'll
mention as well too and and this is
largely due to efforts of companies like
Kimmeridge and when I say companies, I
mean investors. You know, one of the big
reasons you had such prolific shale
growth, especially in you know, the
2010s
was compensation executive compensation
was tied to production growth and so you
had a lot of incentives across the board
to kind of grow production at all costs.
And you know, due to as I said, you
know, there have been a couple of shale
busts, right? There was this that shale
bust in 15 and 16. And then you have
another you know, you've had another
kind of shale bust when COVID came along
and along those, they've reformed a lot
of those incentives and so, you know,
companies are increasingly rewarded for
rewarding shareholders versus focusing
on kind of production growth. You know,
this is exactly what I wanted to talk to
you about, which is the capital
situation because one of the running
themes on our our show is this idea that
you can have these boom bust cycles that
then like leave a lasting scar on the
industry and I think coming out of the
bursting of the shale bubble,
a lot of energy producers suddenly
decided like well, we're not just going
to spend a bunch of money to expand,
we're actually going to pay dividends to
our investors and it's all about capital
discipline and being very, very certain
about what we're actually spending on
and the return for investors.
What's the capital situation been like
for you just you know, going from 2018
to now? How hard was it to actually
convince investors that you know, you're
not just going to spend money in an
unconstrained way and how difficult was
it for you to compete with some
potentially bigger players who are also
fighting for that same capital? I'll
break that into two parts. You know, I
think I think the industry is is had to
do a lot of explaining and a lot of you
know, there's been a lot of kind of show
me you know, investors wanting to see
that there actually is going to be some
capital discipline and I think if you
look really over the last two years, you
know, we've we've seen we've seen that
and
I think even with this latest price
spike, you've seen that. I mean, people
aren't rushing to deploy rigs. I mean,
you've had one large company Continental
Resources who's a you know, one of the
largest private companies say they're
going to increase capex, but I think for
the most part, you know, the the the
industry has been able to attract more
capital by actually showing that that
discipline and I think part of that too
is just you've had a lot of
consolidation in the industry, right? I
mean, when I was first getting started
as an investment banking analyst in
2008, I don't have the number off the
top of my head, but it felt like there
were 70 to 80 kind of publicly traded
companies and you know, now, I mean,
with all due respect to lots of kind of
mid-size companies, there's really only
about 10 companies that actually matter,
right? You know,
as far as the publicly traded companies
go and and the two biggest ones who have
really kind of started to corral the
market for shale are Exxon and Chevron,
right? And those guys those guys have
massive, massive balance sheet,
integrated operations
and yeah, I mean, you just you know,
it's just a little bit kind of
different. There's still a cowboy
element to it for sure, but yeah, I
mean, I think in order to to attract
capital, the industry has had to show
discipline and I think we've done a
pretty good job of doing that over the
last two years. I mean, the you know,
kind of the days of a million barrel a
day growth year over year are largely
gone and and some of that is due to
geologic constraints, although you know,
I will reiterate kind of never never to
underestimate the ingenuity of the
American oil man, but I think another
part of that is is obviously due to
capital and you know, you've had two
three crashes really in the last 10
years. So, you know, investors investors
really are kind of holding everybody's
feet to the fire on that. And then I'll
say is kind of as it pertains to my
business, you know, as I said, there are
a lot more of my businesses than there
are of large shale companies. I mean,
this is the business of operating older
oil and gas assets, right? And like any
business, when things are older, they
break more. And so yeah, you know, it's
it's it's difficult and it's
challenging, right? Because you have a
lot of volatility and you know, you're
dealing with wells where operating costs
are higher, right? We move more water,
so I need more electricity per per well
to move more water. Our operating costs
are higher, and so you've got to do a
little bit more convincing on that cost
discipline side when you're raising
capital. But what I would tell you is
that the pockets of capital that I'm
kind of talking to are are going to be
very different than the pockets of
capital that the larger shale guys are
talking to. I mean, for the most part
the large shale companies are either
publicly traded and so you're talking
to, you know, people that invest in
public markets or they're large
institutionally backed private equity
capital, right? So you have really kind
of four to five large energy private
equity backed firms, most of them in
Houston and Dallas. And you know, they
wield large sums of capital kind of in
the nine, you know, nine to 10 figure
range. And for the most part
that's who's backing shale. You've got
to have scale now. It's a consolidation
game. And yeah, there's just it's
different from my company where we're
largely kind of talking to family
offices, alternative investment
vehicles, you know, people who are
looking to put smaller quantums of
capital to work, you know, to to kind of
find a unique way to play the space.
Cuz really for these larger companies
it's it's the Permian or bust, right? I
mean, that's that's really that's really
kind of the story. This is great because
this allows me to bring it back to
Landman again, which is that the Cooper
character it seems like his business is
kind of like yours. He went around and
there were these old wells that were
producing something and he's like
there's probably more potential. And
then this was like the key thing, he
went out to some like small hard money
lender that was based out of Fort Worth
and they gave him a good he gave him a
good deal. And then the dad said there's
no way the deal could be that good
because I know how financing works, so
like there must be a catch here and
there was I won't get into it. But talk
to us about the structure. Okay, so
you're it sounds like you're kind of
like Cooper because you're finding these
wells for that other people may like be
ready to discard. You're going to non-PE
scale financiers, although his was again
related to organized crime. I assume
yours isn't. But talk to us about some
of the terms of like what is it? Like is
it like you're going to pay me back 100%
plus 20% interest until we break even?
Like how are some of these financing
deals structured? Yeah, no, that's
that's a really good point. I mean, you
know, largely what I found is on the
equity side it's it is similar to
traditional private equity, right? Where
but you know, money is invested and then
you get money back plus a rate of return
and then you have a waterfall structure
which is based on return of capital. And
that can be, you know, either kind of
based on an IRR basis or on an ROI kind
of absolute return of capital. I've seen
it both ways, but that's kind of largely
the way that the equity equity capital
works. So it is actually pretty similar
to a lot of the traditional private
equity firms. You know, on the debt side
it's largely bank capital which you know
is is kind of 7 to 8%.
And then there are, you know, some of
these alternative firms and so these are
more kind of structured credit
providers. You know, there are some that
largely just operate in the energy
space. And you know, you're paying 400
to 500 basis points above what you would
pay a bank, but they're willing to lend
a little bit more aggressively against
the collateral, maybe give you a little
bit more credit for
reserves you have that are not currently
being produced currently being produced.
And you know, they'll they'll they'll
ask for a little bit of upside. So
whether that's in the form of like an
overriding royalty payment, so just
think about that as like a basically
just a cut of the revenue. It's like
similar to like a royalty deal deal in
music. So for every barrel that gets
produced maybe they get a little bit of
percentage and this is obviously after
they've gotten their money back. And so
the way the capital works for my
business is not all that dissimilar to
the way capital works for for larger
businesses. As I said, it's just there's
there's a couple of different ways to
play the space, but traditional equity
investment is pretty similar to, you
know, even the larger kind of private
equity investments. So when the price of
oil starts going up, say we're talking
late March, early April and WTI is
climbing above 100 and then it hits 112.
What actually happens in your business
and what are the thoughts that are going
through your mind? Like do you suddenly
get a bunch of calls from potential
investors going, oh, you know, we're
interested in putting some money in the
company? Do you start thinking like,
well, I need to expand production and
maybe ramp up CapEx?
Or are you just, you know, sitting there
waiting to see what actually pans out
with the Gulf situation? How does it How
does it all work? That's No, those are
really good questions. I mean, obviously
there's there's excitement, right?
>> [laughter]
>> Cuz cuz, you know, the the when it when
a price when a price kind of jumps like
this, obviously your costs don't don't
rise in tandem, so that is that is
profit on top of everything. What I
would tell you in 2022,
you know, last time we had elevated
pricing, you know, where and that was
largely kind of based on the fear of
supply loss that never really happened,
right? The you know, everybody was
saying the you know, Russians were going
to lose three to four million barrels a
day and you know, we need so we need
prices to kind of stimulate more
production. So everybody got really
excited, everybody got to work. You
know, I will say for a company our size,
we authorized a fairly large capital
plan because as I said, I thought that
there was some bite to that bark. And
what happened was as I authorized
everything in May and June when oil was
at 100 and then first production came on
in August and September when oil was
back to 70. So you know, you had this
you you had this big rise in prices, a
commensurate rise in costs, obviously
not as high, but costs go up. I mean,
oil and gas service providers aren't
dumb, right? You know, they see the
price of oil go up 20 to 25%. They're
like, well, you know, your day rate on a
workover rig has just gone from 175 to
275.
>> Huh. Yeah, I mean, it's the the service
the service companies aren't dumb. The
chemical providers might say, well, you
know, this is your your you know, this
chemical you use this xylene you're
using going to go from, you know, 20
bucks a gallon to 40 bucks a gallon
because I know you can pay it because I
I have a computer and I can see what the
price of oil is as well, too. So so you
know, what I would tell you and and
these are in conversations I've had with
a lot of other people in our industry. I
talk to people on the industry on a
day-to-day basis. I have friends that
work for large operators, large capital
providers. I have friends on the service
side, friends in private equity, friends
in investment banking. I mean, I think
everybody's very cautious right now. You
have a president right now who on the
record demonstratively on a daily basis
has shown his disdain and hatred for
high oil prices. You know, a big part of
that is I think he kind of sees oil
prices as the easiest and most visible
way to keep inflation in check, which
leads to kind of his goal of getting
interest rates down, which is beneficial
for a lot of other sectors. And so, you
know, I think similar to just about
every other industry player here, I
think we saw prices go up. And you know,
this is not some Chinese super cycle
like you had in the early aughts, right?
Where like effectively you had to, you
know, the the company the country was
industrializing kind of in front of our
eyes and so you had this step change in
demand growth, which you know, any oil
man will tell you that is that is kind
of the beautiful increase in prices,
right? Versus this sudden, you know,
geopolitical driven supply shock. When
prices rise this fast and this high, you
know, it's really kind of not beneficial
for anybody. And so I think, you know,
the the the tenor of the industry and
the tone of the industry is really kind
of wait and see. I mean, sure, you know,
you're you're going to have some
companies that are going to look to put
a rig to work, are going to increase
CapEx, but you know, we're just able to
pay our debt down a little bit more and
you know, we're going to kind of cash
flow and I'm I'm really interested to
see, you know, kind of where everything
settles out. you obviously had that
announcement today that Hormuz has been
opened, but if you listen to the
Iranians, they've been saying Hormuz is
open, you know, for the last six weeks.
You just, you know, you got to play by
our rules and you got to pay pay by the
you know, the Iranian Republican Guard's
rules. So I'm not quite sure what has
changed. But you know, I I I tweeted
this out a couple of days ago, you know,
the the market kind of clearly thinks
that the war is over and you know,
you're kind of seeing that wash today in
prices. And so I just what it'll be
interesting to see where prices are
going to settle out. I don't think we're
going back to the 50s or 60s. You know,
are you going to see you know, to get
back into Landman, are you going to see
that sweet spot at 75? You know, that
that would be a better baseline for us
than 65 and 60. And so to reiterate what
I said earlier, I think the you know, I
think the industry is largely kind of in
a wait-and-see mode.
So when oil prices collapse like they
seem to be doing today, do the oil
service providers start cutting their
prices as quickly as they raise them?
They do not.
>> [laughter]
>> Yeah.
They do not. You know, you're starting
to see some fuel surcharges on some of
those bills. I would imagine if you
settle back in the 70s or 80s, those are
going to kind of go away. And part of
that is kind of tongue in cheek, right?
You the operators always play a game
with the service companies. So it it it
it it it remains to be seen. As I said,
there's
there's just so much noise in the market
right now. I mean, I can't remember the
last time we ever lived in an era where,
you know,
a tweet could move the price of the
world's most liquid commodity 5 to 10%.
And so yeah, I mean, I I think
everybody's just kind of waiting to see
where this will settle out. It's
effectively impossible to plan a
business, you know, with the [music]
price as volatile as it is right now.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Getting burnt seems like it's just as
much as part of the industry as making a
lot of money. And you get it on both
sides in 2015. And then you mentioned
the sort of the fizzling out of the
post-Ukraine boom, etc. And then here,
of course, the war and the spike was too
short to make any big plans. But like
and then you have this president who
clearly wants more production, but a a
drill, drill, drill, but also wants
lower prices, and these things are in
conflict. Could you see a set of
conditions again in which there's real
meaningful expansion of US drilling or
etc. Or what would it have to take? What
would be the the constellation of events
that would have to happen for like,
okay, we're going to really we're going
to really ramp this out again? Yeah,
that's a good question. I mean, as I
said, I hate to I hate to use round
numbers, but that's just yeah, kind of
the world we live in. And I think if you
saw a sustainable price above 80
over a prolonged period, maybe call it 4
to 8 months, I think you would see a
supply response, cuz there's you know,
there there are a lot of there are a lot
of shale wells that work at 80 to 90
that don't work at 50 to 60.
Depending on who you talk to in the
Permian, you know, there's kind of
anywhere between 5 to 10 years of of
what you would call core inventory left
or economic inventory left. That
obviously change that's obviously
largely a function of price as well as
geology. So, a higher for longer price,
I think you would you would you would
see a production response from the
industry. Now, you know, do I think
we're going to go back to the days of
growing 1 to 1 and 1/2 barrels a day?
You know, I I don't I don't think so.
But could you see, you know, could you
see an an era where, you know, we're
growing 300 to 500,000 barrels a day?
Yeah, I mean, I think that that's
possible, but as I said, you would you
would need to see prices settle above 80
for a prolonged period of time, I think,
to kind of see a supply response, cuz
even shale, which, you know, is kind of
called a um
that's a that's a short short supply
response, right? That's about as short
as it gets.
>> barrels, yeah. Yeah, it's about as short
as it gets, right? I mean, you've got,
you know, but it's still it's still a 4
to 6-month response time, right? I mean,
cuz a lot of the a lot of the rigs that
you saw kind of start to roll off, you
know, that's a that's a 6-month lag,
right? So, you had the liberation day
tariffs where prices kind of cratered
from, you know, 70 to 57, and then we've
kind of bumped around the 50s or 60s,
but even decisions that get made in
April, you know, got made in April and
May of of 2025, you didn't really start
to see the rigging supply response for 4
to 6 months later, and that's largely
that's largely kind of the turnaround
time here. And so, you know, as I said,
I think I think you would need to see
higher for longer prices for the next
couple of months for us to see a
meaningful supply response. But, I mean,
I and and and this is kind of the
consensus view of you know, most of the
sell-side oil research analysts that I
follow as well, too. But, you know, the
as I said, never underestimate the
ingenuity of the the American oilman.
Well, setting price aside, one of the
things the administration said it wanted
to do to get, you know, oil pumping is
basically streamlining, you know,
environmental review and the leasing
process, basically liberalizing the
regulatory environment around starting
new drilling projects. And I know you're
not necessarily specialized in
exploring, you know, for new locations,
but do you get a sense from your
colleagues elsewhere in the industry
about whether or not that liberalization
has actually, you know, translated into
people drilling more or thinking about
drilling more? Yeah, you know, I mean, I
I I think it's certainly helped, but for
sure, I mean, price is a exponentially
higher dictator, you know, of whether or
not somebody kind of chooses to drill.
Yeah, I mean, as I would say, you know,
there's there's the old saying in the
oil patch that
you know, Democrats are actually very
good for the oil and gas industry, and
you know, but they're anti-industry, and
that Republic the Republicans are very
pro-industry, but they're actually very
bad for the industry. You know, and
that's kind of largely a function of
some of those regulations. So, I'm not
going to say that they they don't play
an impact. I mean, there's there
certainly is an impact, and you know, to
the extent that the, you know, the Biden
administration or some of the other
Democratic administrations have been
more punitive to the industry, you know,
that does effectuate a supply response,
you know, that is largely beneficial to
the industry, but but I would tell you,
I think for the most part, you know,
those regulations matter, but they don't
matter nearly as much as what the price
of the commodity is, and then the the
cost of the inputs is. I mean, that's
ultimately, as I said, that's an
exponentially more important factor
than, you know, whether or not there's
50,000 acres in Wyoming that are now
open for drilling that weren't open for
drilling. Tell us a little bit more
about the politics. You know, as you
mentioned, we we we've observed
everyone's observed this that actually
the oil industry, I think why they hate
Democrats so much. It always seems like
the price of oil is high under them,
etc. I understand publicly who's on
whose side because of a very, you know,
various affiliations, etc. But like, how
do people talk about politics at a
country club in Fort Worth or Midland or
something like that? Well, I don't
belong to any country clubs in Fort
Worth. [laughter] Um
And but but I yeah, and I'll I'm going
to try to use my words carefully here,
but
>> I understand.
there's no
there's no surprise that most of the oil
production in this country is done in
Republican states, right? I mean, Texas,
Oklahoma, uh Louisiana. I mean, New
Mexico, I guess, is a is a
democratically run state. The parts of
New Mexico where the oil is produced are
very, very conservative. And and so,
yeah, you know, I would I would tell you
the politics are tricky because
obviously oil country overwhelmingly
supports Trump, but I also think, you
know, behind closed doors, there's a lot
of frustration in the industry of, you
know, Trump, you know, actively kind of
trying to jawbone oil prices down. You
know, I I think that there are a lot of
people that wish that, you know, as I
said, I hate to kind of bring landman
back up, that we could just kind of find
some happy price equilibrium, right?
Whether it's
you know, 70 or 75, you know, not not 55
or 50, which I think was kind of what
they said as their their target price,
but you know, not not 90 or 95, which is
a price that, you know, hurts demand.
And so, yeah, I mean, the the politics
are you know, the overwhelming majority
of the oil industry is Republican and
conservative. But yeah, I think a lot of
people are very frustrated by some of
the administration's rhetoric and
policies over the last year. You know, I
noticed on your Twitter profile, it says
you're based in Colorado, but you
clearly have the Oklahoma roots there,
big fan of the Oklahoma City Thunder, OU
Sooners. You say you're political
independent. The senator from Oklahoma
just moved to the White House, Markwayne
Mullin. There's going to be an open seat
in 2026.
You going to move back to Oklahoma and
run as a independent? Is that a any
possibility of trying to vie for that
seat? An independent oilman like
replacing I don't know, I could see it.
>> [laughter]
>> fame No interest no interest in politics
right now, you know, as anybody will
tell you. Right now. No no interest in
politics right now. Yeah, I've got I've
got young kids, and you know, working on
growing a business, and just politics is
politics is increasingly a you know, a
pretty a pretty nasty game, especially
in a country as polarized as ours. We've
noticed. You know, um you referred
earlier to this idea of like short cycle
shale or short barrels from the shale
patch. And this is one thing I'm curious
about when, you know, given that again,
I'm looking at the Baker Hughes oil rig
count, but like
has that assumption kind of eroded given
that a lot of these basins have matured,
and also, you know, we spoke about
capital discipline before and investor
expectations. It doesn't seem like shale
is as responsive as it used to be. Yeah,
I I mean, I I think that that's right,
and I think that that does have, you
know, a lot to do with the consolidation
in these basins. You know, the other
thing that I'll say, too, and and this
is why the the rig count in in a certain
extent is honestly it's not as important
maybe as it still very important, but
maybe not as important as it was 5 to 10
years ago, and that that's largely just
due to to the ingenuity of the American
oilman. I mean, you you know, back when
I worked for a shale company, this is in
2015, 2016, we were drilling wells in
the Permian Basin, and 7,500-ft lateral,
which is, you know, effectively like a
mile and a half, you know, took anywhere
from kind of 25 to 35 days to drill. The
industry's largely largely doing it
under 10 now. So, just the amount of
time it takes to drill and complete
these wells is just dramatically shorter
than it was even 10 years ago, and I
just people who don't live in the space,
I think, just don't do not realize how
much more efficient these companies have
become at drilling these wells, and so,
effectively, you can do more with less.
And so, as I said, you know, the the rig
count is important, but it is it is less
important maybe than it was 10 years
ago, just cuz as I said, these these
companies can drill these wells so much
faster,
and get production on kind of so much
quicker than they could, you know, even
even 10 years ago. But yeah, I mean, I I
I would agree with you that I would say
on a whole, I think the industry is is
probably less responsive to some of
these price signals, and I think just I
think honestly just a big part of it is,
you know, we've been burned pretty bad,
you know, three times in the last 10
years. And so, it's, you know, kind of
one of those
you know, fool me once type anecdotes, I
guess. I would never underestimate the
ingenuity of the American oilman. But I
you know, in addition to the engineering
prowess, and you know, get it's and it's
it's all really impressive. Is that all
like
you have to be a little messed up in the
head? Like, is that also like I get the
I get the prowess part, but is there
also, you know, in commercial real
estate, I have a friend, and he talks
about like the sickness that people in
this industry have because they're all
just like hyper-optimists, and that
nothing can convince them that they can
fail. Is that also part of why we should
not be underestimating the industry
because there's something going on
in the heads of people like you? Yeah,
people in this industry have a certainly
have a high pain tolerance. You know, I
think
there was a saying in the oil patch that
the difference between an oilman and a
smart oilman is the the smart oilman
makes his money in oil and gas, and then
puts it in real estate. You know, it
takes a it takes a kind of a
particularly sick individual to to live
through these kind of boom and bust
cycles. And uh yeah, what you know, what
what what I will tell you, though, is
that we are resilient, and and everybody
in the industry firmly believes in what
they do and I think that's a big part of
it, right? I mean, you're talking about
extracting a a substance from, you know,
under the ground that literally powers
everything in our world, right? I mean,
I think there was I read some I read
some quotas in an article that, you
know, without new oil and gas
production, if we just were to basically
shut off oil all oil and gas, you know,
development and production, that, you
know, 60% of the world would starve in 6
months. And so, you know, I think that
there is there's obviously a little bit
of uh you know, you got to have a high
pain tolerance, but I think the other
thing too is that everybody in this
industry really believes in what they
do. And, you know, we we create and we
produce a product that powers the modern
world. And so, I think there's a
tremendous amount of pride in that as
well, too. And I don't think you'll talk
to anybody in the industry that does not
feel just an enormous sense of pride in
what we do. And, you know, I think you
know, someone said this to me once and
and I firmly believe in it and they
said, you know, Jack, one of the things
your dad did that I firmly believe in
is, you know, without the shale
revolution, there would have been a lot
more wars. Um and I really do believe in
that because I think that this resource
abundance that, you know, we've kind of
largely taken for granted over the last
10 years has prevented a lot of
conflict, believe it or not, because,
you know, America is largely we're not
wholly energy self-sufficient, right?
There are different blends of crude. We
largely produce one type of oil, which
is called light sweet. You don't just
produce oil and put it in your car,
right? It's got to go to a refinery,
it's got to get broken down into kind of
various products, and you need different
blends of crude oil to be able to do
that. So, we still do import some crude
from other parts of the world, whether
it's Venezuela or the Middle East or
Canada
or Mexico, you know, that's blended
together to kind of make the products
that power the modern world. But, you
know, just the just the fact that, you
know, we're not worried or running of
you know, talking about running out of
oil anymore, I think is just a you know,
just a tremendous achievement that I
just people don't kind of talk about
enough.
And I think they should. Jack McClendon
really appreciate talking to you. Really
glad you came on Odd Lots. Thanks for
indulging our land man related questions
and everything else. And uh let's check
in again in 6 months or year or maybe 7
years when the the 2032 election is
happening in Oklahoma and uh
kids are a bit older. Well, thank you so
much for having me on. As I said, I love
listening to your Odd Lots podcast.
>> Oh, thanks. Appreciate it.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Those stats about the increased
efficiency of the drilling, etc. always
like blow my mind.
>> They're insane. And the story that I
wrote, I guess it was like back in 2016,
was actually super interesting to me and
it was literally about like the oil
companies getting together to
standardize
>> Yeah. a bunch of drilling components
that hadn't been standardized before.
>> Yeah. And so, even eking out these tiny
improvements in cost end up like adding
to the overall supply and enabling
people to keep drilling even when the
benchmark price is really low. I just
found it really fascinating. It's uh it
is really fascinating. You know what
also is what might be a future episode
for us to do at some point, which is the
production refinery mismatch in the
United States and why it is the case,
right?
>> meant to ask that question. Oh, I'm
kicking myself.
>> like we have all these refineries, but
mostly they were built from the era of
when we imported a lot more, right?
And we're producing then we start
producing a lot more, but I think
there's like a new refinery opened
pretty recently, but prior to that, I
don't think like a new refinery had
opened in the US in like 50 years. Some
crazy number.
>> always hear different things about this
cuz I hear that story and then I hear
other people say that like actually the
idea that we can't refine light sweet
crude, Jack, that's that's just for you.
>> [laughter]
>> Thanks, Jack. Sorry.
Is actually like a bit of a myth that
there is some capacity. So, I I would be
very interested in this topic.
>> Jack I'm back on the phone. I know. I I
actually wrote this down in my notes and
then just started thinking about land
man, obviously, and completely forgot to
ask it. So, next time. Next time. But,
there's a lot of interesting stuff
coming out of that episode. One of them
was this idea that when the price of oil
increases, your costs go up, too,
because all of your suppliers can see
that you're making more money and they
can ask for more in return. I you know,
that's a little bit obvious, but I'd
never really considered it before. And
then the other thing that stands out is
just that tension from the Trump
administration where, you know, you want
American oil producers to drill and
boost production, but at the same time
you're very vocal about keeping gas
prices low and the industry is very
aware of those statements as well. So.
By the way, there was in the last couple
minutes, another headline said Iran
would reclose the strait if the US
blockade persists. So, we'll see what's
going on there, but it is interesting
also this element of like
Jack talked about it, the show Land Man
talked about it, finding that sweet
spot. But it doesn't seem like it like
it doesn't ever seem like it stays it's
a pretty volatile thing. You don't get
the sweet spot time for very long.
>> No. Yeah.
>> Um doesn't seem like it. I I do think
you have to be a particular type of
person to to be in this industry.
>> Definitely. Shall we leave it there?
Let's leave it there. This has been
another episode of the Odd Lots podcast.
I'm Tracy Alloway. You can follow me at
Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
You can follow me at the Stalwart.
Follow our guest Jack McClendon. He's at
Jack_McClendon.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez at
Carmen Arman, Dash Bennett at Dash Bot,
and Caleb Brooks at Caleb Brooks. And
for more Odd Lots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odd lots where we have a
daily newsletter and all of our
episodes. And you can chat about all of
these topics 24/7 [music] in our
Discord, discord.gg/odd
lots. And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you
want us to [music] do a follow-up
episode on US refining capacity, then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast [music] platform.
And remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes [music] absolutely ad free. All
you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcasts and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
>> [music]
[music]
[singing]